---
layout: post
title:  "Usability for programmers: dissertation kickoff"
date:   2016-02-10 19:56:00 +0000
categories:
- technical
tags: 
- msc
- dev ux
- hci research methods
---

Another two months to go and I will have finished all of the taught modules
for my master's degree in HCI. Next up -- the dissertation. All I need is a
topic.

Initially I thought about somehow combining HCI with linguistics or NLP. For
example, as I learnt from [@karlsutt](http://twitter.com/karlsutt) (a vocal
advocate of functional programming), developers won't realise how hungry they
are for accessible error messages until they've worked with Haskell or
[Elm](http://elm-lang.org), a functional language that compiles to Javascript.
In addition to (supposedly) eliminating run-time exceptions, Elm aims to make
the programmer happy when debugging by producing more comprehensive and
"human" error messages than what we've so far been exposed to. 

Putting such claims under scrutiny and conducting a more general study of what
makes the difference between a user-friendly error message and one that is
frustrating would certainly have been interesting. But looking into it
further, the common ground that error messages share with linguistics on the
one hand and HCI on the other is too far-fetched to justify. 

Luckily, the idea led to a whole new area of potentially impactful research --
**usability for programmers**. This, I think, has an almost romantic ring to
it. If UX is all about putting the layman front and centre when designing
technology, then what of the neglected developer, deciphering compiler errors,
trying to make sense of `git rebase`, and battling the RSI that gets worse
every time they must reach the tiny ESC key with their pinky because Caps Lock
is already remapped to Ctrl to make Emacs keybindings more ergonomic...

As it turns out, the programmer is not as neglected as one might think. An
initial search for "debugging strategies user study" led to a range of
specialised research from [copy &
paste practices](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/login.jsp?tp=&arnumber=1334896&url=http%3A%2F%2Fieeexplore.ieee.org%2Fxpls%2Fabs_all.jsp%3Farnumber%3D1334896)
to [facilitating feature location in large
codebases](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smr.1593/abstract),
accessible directoy structuring, [automated debugging
tools](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2001445), as well as more social
issues such as code ownership and [managing implicit
knowledge](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1134355).

I have narrowed the choice down to four areas:

1. Causes behind copy & paste errors, and tool design to prevent them
2. A review of debugging strategies: from fault identification to correction
3. Visualising git repositories to facilitate comprehension of version control
4. Feature location in large/unfamiliar codebases

One of these will become my breakfast, lunch and dinner for the better half
of the following year!

In the area of programming HCI, it is not only the research itself that can
make a contribution to the field: adapting research methods to match developer
working habits and evaluating their use has potential value, too. Ethnographic
studies may have their roots in the African bush where missionaries and
anthropologists dutifully noted down cultural peculiarities, but they have
been relatively successfully adapted to fit user research in HCI. But where
the user is a programmer, many of the best practices for conducting usability
studies may well blow up in your face. For example, how do we interpret
eye-tracking data when a developer is scanning code? Is it even significant?
What about qualitative data from a think-aloud session with a solo
programmer? Will the nature of a think-aloud study not transform the session
into what is essentially pair programming? Don't even get me started on diary
studies...

