---
layout: post
title: "User-centred design without users"
date: 2016-01-05 17:10:00 +0000
tags:
- hci
- msc
- ux
- research methods
---

disheartening

All of the taught modules focused on UCD, and how to make use of information
from the client or users at one point or another, however we were ill-equipped
for the situation we found ourselves in during DE2 where we weren’t able to
meet end-users at all, and scarcely secured fruitful meetings with clients. 

On the one hand I think the level of frustration this caused shows how well the
core tenet of the course has come through to me – everything must be based on
users’ wants and needs. On the other hand, we couldn’t really handle the
situation, and felt blocked and delayed by it for a while before facing the
fact that we need to find a different way. 

Any information is better than no information, and the idea to send out a
**remote** survey with the hopes of at least some responses proved extemely
valuable, and in the end our only indirect contact with end users. While
several modules such as U3, DP and IS covered best practices for survey design,
even these best practices begin from the assumption that you understand the
user and pose questions that will make sense to them. BEcause this wasn’t the
case for us, we had to strike the right balance between questions open ended
enough to allow us to understand unknown circumstances, and closed enough
questions to warrant plenty of responses.

[^researchmethodsinhci] says that questionnaires need to be easily understood
and interpreted,as well as feel relevant to the respondent. we had to strike
the right balance between questions open ended enough to let us uncover unknown
circumstances, while still concealing the fact that we were not sure whether
asking a specific question was even relevant to the respondents, as well as the
best practice of asking closed questions where the researcher is not present
for explanations [^yvonne].

We also embraced the opportunities to talk to any of the other stakeholders,
which allowed us to slowly piece together the reality of the situation. In the
future…

While STS never explicitly covered situations where you don’t have access to
users, it did focus greatly on situations of complexity and limited knowledge,
so we were able to apply elements of SSM in DE2. 

STS was one of the modules whose value I didn’t truly appreciate until taking
DE2, where we battled with not only complexity, but extraordinary lack of
access to knowledge or resources – the core tenet of SSM. Rich pictures
[^learningforaction] here turned out to be hugely supportive, and not only
during the first stage of drawing them out. Unlike in STS, where due to little
understanding we never actually updated our rich picture,  here, as our
assumptions changed and bits of information trickled in here and there, we were
able to keep adding to our rich picture and it was a very convenient resource
to glance at when you needed to remind yourself of the big (and indeed rather
rich) picture. 

We could have taken the use of rich pictures even further, as
[^learningforaction] suggests, by presenting it to the client in order to give
an account of how we saw the situation, for him to confirm we were on the right
track. While we did in fact present the client with a similar question by
asking him to validate our assumptions, showing him the actual visual diagram
of our account would have definitely facilitated us being on the same page. In
the future…

Though unrelated to a lack of knowledge, SSM also proved useful for DE2 because
of how much the brief we were given was coupled with both social and
organisational factors. By utilising other SSM elements, we were able to enrich
our design proposal further by including considerations for service design, and
awareness of the social issues fundamental to creating the problem.
